---
title: i find comfort in the (hypothetical) heat death of the universe
date: 2023-10-11
---

Here, atoms float inanimately in this barren tundra of a universe, all energy dissipated into heat with nothing left to use. Throughout the infinite expanse of this void, not a single reserve of consolidated energy remains. This is it. The end of times. But how exactly did we get here?

Okay, let's rewind a smidge—a hundred thousand trillion years, give or take.

Here we are, present-day, present-time, or at least the best approximation we could hope for in the grand tapestry of time. 

Where are you now? You’re in high school. You're stressing about your applications. Your future. A heartbreak. And, like all people, you’ve had your occasional bouts of existentialism, the type that comes about exclusively between the hazy hours of 10 PM and 3 AM. These periods are often spent pondering relationships, indulging in self-reflection, and, if you’re me, re-constructing the entire timeline of Five Nights at Freddy’s in excruciating detail. 

But inevitably, we all stumble across some variation of the exact same question: what is our significance in the universe, and what lies beyond after our time inevitably ends? We may all have our own theories and speculations, but one thing is for sure: none of us can be truly certain. And perhaps some experience it more intensely than others, but that doubt is something which plagues us all. 

It is said that you experience two deaths: the first when your physical body shuts down, and the second when your name is uttered for the last time. But I propose a third death. One where every conceivable mark of our collective worldly impact, be it direct or indirect, has been expunged from existence: the death of the universe.  

It’ll probably happen one way or another—sorry if you weren’t aware. The concept is difficult to visualise, but the logic is simple. The universe tends towards randomness, towards uniformity. It’s why ice cubes melt to match room temperature, why sugar dissolves in tea, and why perpetual motion machines never work. It's not rocket science, but a basic, indisputable matter of probability—like how a pair of dice add up most often to a handful of median values, an atomic configuration with distributed energy is most likely simply because it has more combinations. Consolidated energy will thereby spread itself apart, dispersing into heat. Extrapolate this for another trillion years, and you get the heat death of the universe. 

Don’t panic, though: you won’t be there to see it. It’s so far away we can’t even be sure it’ll happen. But maybe that’s the problem: that everything is so big and far that it makes you feel, well, tiny and inconsequential. 

I, however, feel at peace with the possibility that we're all insignificant in the rat race of humanity. A sense of schadenfreude, even, knowing that those immortalised in legendary renown—a status I couldn't dare to dream of—will suffer the exact same fate. I could push myself, sell my happiness to accomplish something historical, sell my soul to delay, perhaps eliminate, the second death. But the third death spares no one. It’s capricious, immune to reason. Entropy, creation's leech of a twin, will indiscriminately erase all records of our known universe. 

Well, at least that’s the theory. There may very well be a god that will rescue us boiling frogs from this doomed crockpot. Maybe one day, someone up there will pull the plug on this simulation. Attempting to predict the fate of our species, let alone the entire universe, can only be described as a fool’s errand. Nonetheless, the future in which our universe becomes diluted into nothingness, where our existence proves completely incidental and where life has no greater meaning, is widely considered the bleakest outcome. 

Regardless of such, we still feel, don’t we? We still experience triumph and love and devastation. Regardless of the source or the outcome, our lives have meaning simply because we, the ones experiencing it, care. We decide for ourselves where our purpose lies, and, heck, if we want to, we can let others decide. So what if the universe is massive, if you and your loved ones are but glorified specks of dust, if you are but a blink of an eye in the universe’s boundless existence?

It all matters to you, doesn’t it? 

Here is where I must make a confession. The heat death of the universe is, in fact, not the only way the universe could go. There exists another theory, one that I believe aligns better with the nature of life: the Big Bounce. It asserts that the universe will collapse back in on itself under the sheer force of its own gravity, into a state not dissimilar to that which preceded the Big Bang. In other words, it returns exactly to where it began. 

And you are the same. You may think of existence as all you’ve ever known and find the notion of eternal unconsciousness utterly incomprehensible. But is that truly so? Think to yourself: where were you before you were born, for the billions of years before your atoms took the shape of you? 

You were nothingness. And once your borrowed time is up, to that nothingness you may very well return.  

And thus repeats the cycle of the universe. 
